torch 3 (next-to-last in series) (#109)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2020-10-07-torch-modules/torch_modules.Rmd

---
title: "Using torch modules"
description: > 

>  In this next-to-last installment of a mini-series introducing torch basics, we replace hand-coded matrix operations by modules, considerably simplifying our toy network's code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 In this third installment of our mini-series introducing torch basics, we replace hand-coded matrix operations by modules, considerably simplifying our toy network's code. 
```

author:
  - name: Sigrid Keydana
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: keydanatorchmodules
date: 10-07-2020
categories:
  - Torch
  - R
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
    toc: true
preview: images/preview.jpg
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

[Last
week](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2020-10-01-torch-network-from-scratch),
we started learning about `torch` basics by coding a simple neural
network from scratch, making use of just a single of `torch`'s features:
*tensors*. [On
Monday](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2020-10-05-torch-network-with-autograd),
we immensely simplified the task, replacing manual backpropagation with
*autograd*. Today, we *modularize* the network - in both the habitual
and a very literal sense: Low-level matrix operations are swapped out

> for `torch` `module`s.

Reviewer: Since this post will (presumably) be read in the future, I think you're better off referencing previous posts as first and second (or something of the like)—last week and Monday aren't very meaningful without context.

Author: makes sense!

## Modules

From other frameworks (Keras, say), you may be used to distinguishing
between *models* and *layers*. In `torch`, both are instances of

> `nn_Module()`, and thus, have some methods in common. For those thinking
> in terms of "models" and "layers", I'm artificially splitting up this
> section into two parts, for clarity of exposition. In reality though,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`nn_Module()`, and thus, have some methods in common. For those thinking
in terms of "models" and "layers", I'm artificially splitting up this
section into two parts. In reality though,
```

there is no dichotomy: New modules may be composed of existing ones up
to arbitrary levels of recursion.

### Base modules ("layers")

Instead of writing out an affine operation by hand -- `x$mm(w1) + b1`,
say --, as we've been doing so far, we can create a linear module. The
following snippet instantiates a linear layer that expects three-feature
inputs and returns a single output per observation:

```{r}
library(torch)
l <- nn_linear(3, 1)
```

The module has two parameters, "weight" and "bias". Both have already

> been initialized:

Reviewer: Automatically by torch or is that what you did in the previous chunk?

Author: right, making that clearer...

```{r}
l$parameters
```

    $weight
    torch_tensor 
    -0.0385  0.1412 -0.5436
    [ CPUFloatType{1,3} ]

    $bias
    torch_tensor 
    -0.1950
    [ CPUFloatType{1} ]

Modules are callable; calling a module executes its `forward()` method,

> which for a linear layer just matrix-multiplies input and weights and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which, for a linear layer, matrix-multiplies input and weights and
```

adds the bias.

Let's try this:

```{r}
data  <- torch_randn(10, 3)
out <- l(data)
```

Unsurprisingly, `out` now holds some data:

```{r}
out$data()
```

    torch_tensor 
     0.2711
    -1.8151
    -0.0073
     0.1876
    -0.0930
     0.7498
    -0.2332
    -0.0428
     0.3849
    -0.2618
    [ CPUFloatType{10,1} ]

> In addition though, it knows what will need to be done, should ever it

Reviewer: I'm not sure what "it" is referring to here. If I were to scroll up to trace to the last noun, "it" would refer to `out`, but I'm still not totally sure what that means.

Author: yeah, changing ....

be asked to calculate gradients:

```{r}
out$grad_fn
```

    AddmmBackward

> (You may remember from the preceding post that when we work with tensors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may remember from the preceding post that when we work with tensors
```

directly, we need to create them passing `requires_grad = TRUE` to
achieve this. With modules, `torch` correctly assumes that we'll want to

> perform backpropagation at some point.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
perform backpropagation at some point.
```

Reviewer: Having a stand-alone parenthetical seems off to me. You could put it as an aside, if you think it's out of place inline with everything else.

Author: oh yeah, you're spotting everything :-)

Thinking about it, I even changed this to a paragraph starting "Note the difference..." :-)

> By now though, we haven't called `backward()` yet. Thus, no gradients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We haven't called `backward()` yet. Thus, no gradients
```

```{r, error = TRUE}
out$backward()
```

    Error in (function (self, gradient, keep_graph, create_graph)  : 
      grad can be implicitly created only for scalar outputs (_make_grads at ../torch/csrc/autograd/autograd.cpp:47)

Why the error? *Autograd* expects the output tensor to be a scalar,
while in our example, we have a tensor of size `(10, 1)`. This error
won't often occur in practice, where we work with *batches* of inputs
(sometimes, just a single batch). But still, it's interesting to see how
to resolve this.

To make the example work, we introduce a -- virtual -- final aggregation
step -- taking the mean, say. Let's call it `avg`. If such a mean were
taken, its gradient with respect to `l$weight` would be obtained via the
chain rule:

$$
\begin{equation*} 
 \frac{\partial \ avg}{\partial w} = \frac{\partial \ avg}{\partial \ out}  \ \frac{\partial \ out}{\partial w}
\end{equation*}
$$

Of the quantities on the right side, we're interested in the second. We
need to provide the first one, the way it would look *if really we were
taking the mean*:

```{r}
d_avg_d_out <- torch_tensor(10)$`repeat`(10)$unsqueeze(1)$t()
out$backward(gradient = d_avg_d_out)
```

> Now, `l$weight$grad` and `l$bias$grad` *do* contain the respective

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, `l$weight$grad` and `l$bias$grad` *do* contain their respective
```

Author: yeah, right... actually i'm probably being overly clear here as often ... `do contain gradients` should suffice...

gradients:

```{r}
l$weight$grad
l$bias$grad
```

    torch_tensor 
     1.3410  6.4343 -30.7135
    [ CPUFloatType{1,3} ]
    torch_tensor 
     100
    [ CPUFloatType{1} ]

> Back to the main thread. Besides `nn_linear()` , `torch` provides pretty

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to `nn_linear()` , `torch` provides pretty
```
